Assignment 8 Memory Management Basic File added. (#11)
Dharanash15/SolitonTemplate: src/Assignment8_1/MemoryManagementBasics/Readme.md

# Memory Optimization in C#: A Practical Assignment

## Introduction

In this assignment, we'll explore memory management in C#, a critical aspect of any high-
performance application- We'll learn how to detect, diagnose, and resolve memory issues in a C#
codebase. We'll also discuss best practices for memory management and use tools for memory
profiling.Upon completing this assignment, you'll have a deeper understanding of how to optimize

> the pertbrmance of your C# applications by managing memory more effectively<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the pertbrmance of your C# applications by managing memory more effectively.<br>
```

## Task 1: Detecting and Diagnosing Memory Issues

> **Objective**: To identify and diagnose memory issues in a program.Code Snippet with Memory <br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Objective**: To identify and diagnose memory issues in a `program.cs` .Code Snippet with Memory <br>
```

Author: But the question itself is in that way. It says " in a C# program."

**Issue**: <br>

``` csharp

> public class MemoryEater

Reviewer: Instead of `MemoryEater`, we could have a name like `MemoryConsumer`.

{

>     List<int[]> memAll0c = new List<int[]>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    List<int[]> memoryConsumers= new List<int[]>;
```

Name of the collections should be in plural and have a meaningful name.

Author: This name is given in the question. I also thought of changing the name ,but I am not sure in doing it.

>     public void Allocate()

Reviewer: Name of the method could be much more meaningful. `AllocateMemory`

    {
        while (true)
        {

>             memAll0c.Add(new int[1000]);

Reviewer: Change the name of the collection accordingly.

            // Assume memA110c variable is used only within this loop.
            Thread.Sleep(10);
        }
    }
}
class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {

>         MemoryEater me = new MemoryEater();

Reviewer: Update the name of the class.
The created object should also be modified.

        me. Allocate();
    }
}
```

 

### Steps

 

1. Analyze the above code snippet. Can you identify the memory issue here?
2. Use a memory profiler tool to diagnose the problem in the code. You can use tools like
Visual Studio's built-in Diagnostic Tools <br>
**Expected Outcome**: Identitication and diagnosis of the memory issue in the provided code snippet.

 

> ## Task 2: Implementing Memory Management Best

Reviewer: The name of the title should be better.  Use something like `Better Implementation - Solving memory management issues`

 

**Objective**: To fix the memory issue in the provided code snippet and implement memory management best practices.

 

### Steps

 

1. Based on your diagnosis, fix the memory issue in the provided code snippet.

> 2. Implement other best practices for memory management in C#. enmis might include practices such as (All the below point may not necessary apply to the given problem):

Reviewer: I was unable to get the meaning of the `enmis`. What is it actually?

 

- Minimizing allocations in performance-critical code paths
- Using using statements or finally blocks to ensure resources are cleaned up properly
- Avoiding large object heap allocations when possible

 

**Expected Outcome:** 
The optimized code with memory management best practices implemented.
## Task 3: Memory Profiling

Objective: To understand and demonstrate the use of the memory profiling tool in VS for C#.

### Steps

> 1. Use the same memory profiler tool as in Task 2 (or choose another if you preference) to profile the memory usage of the optimized code from Task 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the same memory profiler tool as in Task 2 (or choose another based on your preference) to profile the memory usage of the optimized code from Task 3.
```

> 2. Document the changes in memory usage before and alter your optimizations. Can you explain why these changes occurred based on your understanding of memory management in C#?<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Document the changes in memory usage before and after your optimizations. Can you explain why these changes occurred based on your understanding of memory management in C#?<br>
```

> **Expected Outcome**: A comparison of memory usage bef6re and after optimization. A clear understanding of how memory profiling tools in VS can help optimize code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Expected Outcome**: A comparison of memory usage before and after optimization. A clear understanding of how memory profiling tools in VS can help optimize code.
```

<br><br>

# Memory Issue Identification and Optimization Report
This task documents the identification and optimization of a memory issue in a C# program. The primary objective was to fix the memory issue and implement best practices for memory management while providing insights into the usage of memory profiling tools available in Visual Studio.

## Original Code Analysis

### Memory Issue Identification

> The original code exhibited a critical memory issue characterized by uncontrolled memory growth. Key points of concern included:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original code exhibited a critical memory issue characterized by uncontrolled memory growth. Key points of concern includes:
```

### Updated Code Structure

Below is a simplified code structure reflecting the optimizations:

```csharp
internal class MemoryEater
    {
        // Define the maximum array, so that it does not form a large object to store in heap memory.
        private const int MaxArrays = 10000;

        /// <summary>
        /// Allocates memory arrays in a controlled manner.
        /// </summary>
        public void Allocate()
        {
            while (true)
            {
                try
                {
                    List<int[]> memAlloc = new List<int[]>();
                    for (int i = 0; i < MaxArrays; i++)
                    {
                        memAlloc.Add(new int[1000]);
                        Thread.Sleep(10);
                    }

                    // Store the required data and release the memory.
                    memAlloc.Clear();
                }
                catch (OutOfMemoryException)
                {
                    Console.WriteLine($"Reached OutOfMemory ,store the required data and release the memory");
                    GC.Collect();
                }
            }
        }

>     }

Reviewer: Update the name as given in the suggestions above.

## Usage of Visual Studio Memory Profiling Tools

### Importance of Memory Profiling

Memory profiling tools in Visual Studio played a vital role in optimizing the code. They helped in:

- Monitoring memory usage trends over time.
- Identifying memory leaks.
- Tracking object lifetimes.
- Analyzing garbage collection behavior.
- Profiling memory allocations.

### Optimization Process

1. **Memory Usage Analysis:** We monitored memory usage over time to identify excessive memory growth.

2. **Object Lifetime Tracking:** This feature helped us identify objects with long lifetimes, pinpointing memory retention issues.

3. **GC Stats:** Analyzing garbage collection statistics aided in optimizing when and how the garbage collector ran.

4. **Allocations Analysis:** We analyzed memory allocations to identify areas where excessive or unnecessary allocations occurred.

## Understandings

> From this task, I understand memory issue in the original code was successfully identified and optimized using best practices for memory management in C#. Visual Studio's memory profiling tools proved invaluable in this process, allowing us to ensure efficient memory usage and resource cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this task, I understood memory issue in the original code was successfully identified and optimized using best practices for memory management in C#. Visual Studio's memory profiling tools proved invaluable in this process, allowing us to ensure efficient memory usage and resource cleanup.
```
